source/SpinalHDL/Simulation/signal.rst, before:

Accessing signals of the simulation
==========================================

Read and write signals
----------------------

Each interface signal of the toplevel can be read and written from Scala:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 3 5

   * - Syntax
     - Description
   * - ``Bool.toBoolean``
     - Read a hardware ``Bool`` as a Scala ``Boolean`` value
   * - ``Bits``/``UInt``/``SInt.toInt``
     - Read a hardware ``BitVector`` as a Scala ``Int`` value
   * - ``Bits``/``UInt``/``SInt.toLong``
     - Read a hardware ``BitVector`` as a Scala ``Long`` value
   * - ``Bits``/``UInt``/``SInt.toBigInt``
     - Read a hardware ``BitVector`` as a Scala ``BigInt`` value
   * - ``SpinalEnumCraft.toEnum``
     - Read a hardware ``SpinalEnumCraft`` as a Scala ``SpinalEnumElement`` value
   * - ``Bool #= Boolean``
     - Assign a hardware ``Bool`` from an Scala ``Boolean``
   * - ``Bits``/``UInt``/``SInt #= Int``
     - Assign a hardware ``BitVector`` from a Scala ``Int``
   * - ``Bits``/``UInt``/``SInt #= Long``
     - Assign a hardware ``BitVector`` from a Scala ``Long``
   * - ``Bits``/``UInt``/``SInt #= BigInt``
     - Assign a hardware ``BitVector`` from a Scala ``BigInt``
   * - ``SpinalEnumCraft #= SpinalEnumElement``
     - Assign a hardware ``SpinalEnumCraft`` from a Scala ``SpinalEnumElement``
   * - ``Data.randomize()``
     - Assign a random value to a SpinalHDL value.


.. code-block:: scala

   dut.io.a #= 42
   dut.io.a #= 42l
   dut.io.a #= BigInt("101010", 2)
   dut.io.a #= BigInt("0123456789ABCDEF", 16)
   println(dut.io.b.toInt)

Accessing signals inside the component's hierarchy
--------------------------------------------------

To access signals which are inside the component's hierarchy, you have first to set the given signal as ``simPublic``.

You can add this ``simPublic`` tag directly in the hardware description:

.. code-block:: scala

   object SimAccessSubSignal {
     import spinal.core.sim._

     class TopLevel extends Component {
       val counter = Reg(UInt(8 bits)) init(0) simPublic() // Here we add the simPublic tag on the counter register to make it visible
       counter := counter + 1
     }

     def main(args: Array[String]) {
       SimConfig.compile(new TopLevel).doSim{dut =>
         dut.clockDomain.forkStimulus(10)

         for(i <- 0 to 3) {
           dut.clockDomain.waitSampling()
           println(dut.counter.toInt)
         }
       }
     }
   }

Or you can add it later, after having instantiated your toplevel for the simulation:


.. code-block:: scala

   object SimAccessSubSignal {
     import spinal.core.sim._
     class TopLevel extends Component {
       val counter = Reg(UInt(8 bits)) init(0)
       counter := counter + 1
     }

     def main(args: Array[String]) {
       SimConfig.compile {
         val dut = new TopLevel
         dut.counter.simPublic()     // Call simPublic() here
         dut
       }.doSim{dut =>
         dut.clockDomain.forkStimulus(10)

         for(i <- 0 to 3) {
           dut.clockDomain.waitSampling()
           println(dut.counter.toInt)
         }
       }
     }
   }

Commit message:

Simulation/signal: Load and Store of Memory in Simulation

source/SpinalHDL/Simulation/signal.rst, after:

Accessing signals of the simulation
==========================================

Read and write signals
----------------------

Each interface signal of the toplevel can be read and written from Scala:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 3 5

   * - Syntax
     - Description
   * - ``Bool.toBoolean``
     - Read a hardware ``Bool`` as a Scala ``Boolean`` value
   * - ``Bits``/``UInt``/``SInt.toInt``
     - Read a hardware ``BitVector`` as a Scala ``Int`` value
   * - ``Bits``/``UInt``/``SInt.toLong``
     - Read a hardware ``BitVector`` as a Scala ``Long`` value
   * - ``Bits``/``UInt``/``SInt.toBigInt``
     - Read a hardware ``BitVector`` as a Scala ``BigInt`` value
   * - ``SpinalEnumCraft.toEnum``
     - Read a hardware ``SpinalEnumCraft`` as a Scala ``SpinalEnumElement`` value
   * - ``Bool #= Boolean``
     - Assign a hardware ``Bool`` from an Scala ``Boolean``
   * - ``Bits``/``UInt``/``SInt #= Int``
     - Assign a hardware ``BitVector`` from a Scala ``Int``
   * - ``Bits``/``UInt``/``SInt #= Long``
     - Assign a hardware ``BitVector`` from a Scala ``Long``
   * - ``Bits``/``UInt``/``SInt #= BigInt``
     - Assign a hardware ``BitVector`` from a Scala ``BigInt``
   * - ``SpinalEnumCraft #= SpinalEnumElement``
     - Assign a hardware ``SpinalEnumCraft`` from a Scala ``SpinalEnumElement``
   * - ``Data.randomize()``
     - Assign a random value to a SpinalHDL value.


.. code-block:: scala

   dut.io.a #= 42
   dut.io.a #= 42l
   dut.io.a #= BigInt("101010", 2)
   dut.io.a #= BigInt("0123456789ABCDEF", 16)
   println(dut.io.b.toInt)


.. _simulation_of_memory:

Load and Store of Memory in Simulation
--------------------------------------

It is possible to modify the contents of ``Mem`` hardware interface
components in simulation.  The `data` argument should be a word-width
value with the `address` being the word-address within.

There is no API to convert address and/or individual data bits into
units other than the natural word size.

There is no API to mark any memory location with simulation `X` (undefined)
state.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 3 5

   * - Syntax
     - Description
   * - ``Mem.getBigInt(address: Long): BigInt``
     - Read a word from simulator at the word-address.
   * - ``Mem.setBigInt(address: Long, data: BigInt)``
     - Write a word to simulator at the word-address.


Accessing signals inside the component's hierarchy
--------------------------------------------------

To access signals which are inside the component's hierarchy, you have first to set the given signal as ``simPublic``.

You can add this ``simPublic`` tag directly in the hardware description:

.. code-block:: scala

   object SimAccessSubSignal {
     import spinal.core.sim._

     class TopLevel extends Component {
       val counter = Reg(UInt(8 bits)) init(0) simPublic() // Here we add the simPublic tag on the counter register to make it visible
       counter := counter + 1
     }

     def main(args: Array[String]) {
       SimConfig.compile(new TopLevel).doSim{dut =>
         dut.clockDomain.forkStimulus(10)

         for(i <- 0 to 3) {
           dut.clockDomain.waitSampling()
           println(dut.counter.toInt)
         }
       }
     }
   }

Or you can add it later, after having instantiated your toplevel for the simulation:


.. code-block:: scala

   object SimAccessSubSignal {
     import spinal.core.sim._
     class TopLevel extends Component {
       val counter = Reg(UInt(8 bits)) init(0)
       counter := counter + 1
     }

     def main(args: Array[String]) {
       SimConfig.compile {
         val dut = new TopLevel
         dut.counter.simPublic()     // Call simPublic() here
         dut
       }.doSim{dut =>
         dut.clockDomain.forkStimulus(10)

         for(i <- 0 to 3) {
           dut.clockDomain.waitSampling()
           println(dut.counter.toInt)
         }
       }
     }
   }
