README.rst, before:

=========
SpinalDoc
=========

This is the documentation repository for
`SpinalHDL <https://github.com/SpinalHDL/SpinalHDL>`_.

It is published on
`spinalhdl.github.io/SpinalDoc-RTD <https://spinalhdl.github.io/SpinalDoc-RTD/master/index.html>`_.

There is also a Chinese version on
`spinalhdl-cn.github.io/SpinalDoc-RTD <https://spinalhdl-cn.github.io/SpinalDoc-RTD/zh_CN/index.html>`_.
This continuous localization version is maintained with the help of `Weblate <https://hosted.weblate.org/projects/spinaldoc-rtd/>`_.

You can also find the API documentation on
`spinalhdl.github.io/SpinalHDL <https://spinalhdl.github.io/SpinalHDL/dev/spinal/index.html>`_.


How to build this documentation
===============================

With venv
---------

Requirements (system)

* make
* git

Create a virtual environment with pipenv (will use the Pipfile for installing the necessary packages)

.. code:: shell

   python3 -m venv .venv

then you can activate the virtual enviroment (in bash) and install the dependencies

.. code:: shell

   source .venv/bin/activate
   pip install -r requirements.txt

and then you can use ``make`` the usual way

.. code:: shell

   make html     # for html
   make latex    # for latex
   make latexpdf # for latex (will require latexpdf installed)
   make          # list all the available output format

all the outputs will be in docs folder (for html: docs/html)


With Docker
-----------

Requirements (system):

* docker
* git

To create the custom docker image (with python and its dependencies):

.. code:: shell

   docker build -t spinaldoc-rtd .

Then to build the docs:

.. code:: shell

   docker run -it --rm -v $PWD:/docs spinaldoc-rtd

You can still run custom commands in the docker, for instance to clean:

.. code:: shell

   docker run -it --rm -v $PWD:/docs spinaldoc-rtd make clean

It is also possible to create the custom docker image to build a pdf (heavier):

.. code:: shell

   docker build -f pdf.Dockerfile -t spinaldoc-pdf .

And to run it:

.. code:: shell

   docker run -it --rm -v $PWD:/docs spinaldoc-pdf


Native
------

Requirements (system):

* make
* git

Requirements (Python 3):

* sphinx
* sphinx-rtd-theme
* sphinxcontrib-wavedrom
* sphinx-multiversion

After installing the requirements you can run

.. code:: shell

   make html     # for html
   make latex    # for latex
   make latexpdf # for latex (will require latexpdf installed)
   make          # list all the available output format

you can create build multiple version of the doc via

.. code:: shell

   sphinx-multiversion source docs/html

in the docs/html there will be a folder with the builded doc for each branch and tag

Commit message:

add instruction for building chinese version.

README.rst, after:

=========
SpinalDoc
=========

This is the documentation repository for
`SpinalHDL <https://github.com/SpinalHDL/SpinalHDL>`_.

It is published on
`spinalhdl.github.io/SpinalDoc-RTD <https://spinalhdl.github.io/SpinalDoc-RTD/master/index.html>`_.

There is also a Chinese version on
`spinalhdl-cn.github.io/SpinalDoc-RTD <https://spinalhdl-cn.github.io/SpinalDoc-RTD/zh_CN/index.html>`_.
This continuous localization version is maintained with the help of `Weblate <https://hosted.weblate.org/projects/spinaldoc-rtd/>`_.

You can also find the API documentation on
`spinalhdl.github.io/SpinalHDL <https://spinalhdl.github.io/SpinalHDL/dev/spinal/index.html>`_.


How to build this documentation
===============================

With venv
---------

Requirements (system)

* make
* git

Create a virtual environment with pipenv (will use the Pipfile for installing the necessary packages)

.. code:: shell

   python3 -m venv .venv

then you can activate the virtual enviroment (in bash) and install the dependencies

.. code:: shell

   source .venv/bin/activate
   pip install -r requirements.txt

and then you can use ``make`` the usual way

.. code:: shell

   make html     # for html
   make latex    # for latex
   make latexpdf # for latex (will require latexpdf installed)
   make          # list all the available output format

all the outputs will be in docs folder (for html: docs/html)

The Chinese version can be built by

.. code:: shell

   make -e SPHINXOPTS="-D language='zh_CN'" html # for html in Chinese


With Docker
-----------

Requirements (system):

* docker
* git

To create the custom docker image (with python and its dependencies):

.. code:: shell

   docker build -t spinaldoc-rtd .

Then to build the docs:

.. code:: shell

   docker run -it --rm -v $PWD:/docs spinaldoc-rtd

You can still run custom commands in the docker, for instance to clean:

.. code:: shell

   docker run -it --rm -v $PWD:/docs spinaldoc-rtd make clean

It is also possible to create the custom docker image to build a pdf (heavier):

.. code:: shell

   docker build -f pdf.Dockerfile -t spinaldoc-pdf .

And to run it:

.. code:: shell

   docker run -it --rm -v $PWD:/docs spinaldoc-pdf


Native
------

Requirements (system):

* make
* git

Requirements (Python 3):

* sphinx
* sphinx-rtd-theme
* sphinxcontrib-wavedrom
* sphinx-multiversion

After installing the requirements you can run

.. code:: shell

   make html     # for html
   make latex    # for latex
   make latexpdf # for latex (will require latexpdf installed)
   make          # list all the available output format

you can create build multiple version of the doc via

.. code:: shell

   sphinx-multiversion source docs/html

in the docs/html there will be a folder with the builded doc for each branch and tag
