source/SpinalHDL/Data types/Fix.rst, before:

.. warning::
   SpinalHDL fixed-point support is only partially used/tested, if you find any bugs with it, or you think that some functionality is missing, please create a `Github issue <https://github.com/SpinalHDL/SpinalHDL/issues>`_. Also, please do not use undocumented features in your code.

.. _fixed:

UFix/SFix
=========

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``UFix`` and ``SFix`` types correspond to a vector of bits that can be used for fixed-point arithmetic.

Declaration
^^^^^^^^^^^

The syntax to declare a fixed-point number is as follows:

Unsigned Fixed-Point
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 3 1 2 3 1

   * - Syntax
     - bit width
     - resolution
     - max
     - min
   * - UFix(peak:ExpNumber, resolution:ExpNumber)
     - peak-resolution
     - 2^resolution
     - 2^peak-2^resolution
     - 0
   * - UFix(peak:ExpNumber, width:BitCount)
     - width
     - 2^(peak-width)
     - 2^peak-2^(peak-width)
     - 0

Signed Fixed-Point
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 3 1 2 3 1

   * - Syntax
     - bit width
     - resolution
     - max
     - min
   * - SFix(peak:ExpNumber, resolution:ExpNumber)
     - peak-resolution+1
     - 2^resolution
     - 2^peak-2^resolution
     - -(2^peak)
   * - SFix(peak:ExpNumber, width:BitCount)
     - width
     - 2^(peak-width-1)
     - 2^peak-2^(peak-width-1)
     - -(2^peak)

Format
~~~~~~

The chosen format follows the usual way of defining fixed-point number format using Q notation. More information can be found on the `Wikipedia page about the Q number format <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Q_(number_format)>`_.

For example Q8.2 will mean a fixed-point number of 8+2 bits, where 8 bits are used for the natural part and 2 bits for the fractional part.
If the fixed-point number is signed, one more bit is used for the sign.

The resolution is defined as being the smallest power of two that can be represented in this number.

Examples
~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: scala

   // Unsigned Fixed-Point
   val UQ_8_2 = UFix(peak = 8 exp, resolution = -2 exp)
   val UQ_8_2 = UFix(8 exp, -2 exp)

   val UQ_8_2 = UFix(peak = 8 exp, width = 10 bits)
   val UQ_8_2 = UFix(8 exp, 10 bits)

   // Signed Fixed-Point
   val Q_8_2 = SFix(peak = 8 exp, resolution = -2 exp)
   val Q_8_2 = SFix(8 exp, -2 exp)

   val Q_8_2 = SFix(peak = 8 exp, width = 11 bits)
   val Q_8_2 = SFix(8 exp, 11 bits)

Assignments
^^^^^^^^^^^

Valid Assignments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

An assignment to a fixed-point value is valid when there is no bit loss. Any bit loss will result in an error.

If the source fixed-point value is too big, the ``.truncated`` function will allow you to resize the source number to match the destination size.

Example
"""""""

.. code-block:: scala

   val i16_m2 = SFix(16 exp, -2 exp)
   val i16_0  = SFix(16 exp,  0 exp)
   val i8_m2  = SFix( 8 exp, -2 exp)
   val o16_m2 = SFix(16 exp, -2 exp)
   val o16_m0 = SFix(16 exp,  0 exp)
   val o14_m2 = SFix(14 exp, -2 exp)

   o16_m2 := i16_m2            // OK
   o16_m0 := i16_m2            // Not OK, Bit loss
   o14_m2 := i16_m2            // Not OK, Bit loss
   o16_m0 := i16_m2.truncated  // OK, as it is resized
   o14_m2 := i16_m2.truncated  // OK, as it is resized

From a Scala constant
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Scala ``BigInt`` or ``Double`` types can be used as constants when assigning to ``UFix`` or ``SFix`` signals.

Example
"""""""

.. code-block:: scala

   val i4_m2 = SFix(4 exp, -2 exp)
   i4_m2 := 1.25    // Will load 5 in i4_m2.raw
   i4_m2 := 4       // Will load 16 in i4_m2.raw

Raw value
^^^^^^^^^

The integer representation of the fixed-point number can be read or written by using the ``raw`` property.

Example
~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: scala

   val UQ_8_2 = UFix(8 exp, 10 bits)
   UQ_8_2.raw := 4        // Assign the value corresponding to 1.0
   UQ_8_2.raw := U(17)    // Assign the value corresponding to 4.25

Operators
^^^^^^^^^

The following operators are available for the ``UFix`` type:

Arithmetic
~~~~~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 1 7 4 7

   * - Operator
     - Description
     - Returned resolution
     - Returned amplitude
   * - x + y
     - Addition
     - Min(x.resolution, y.resolution)
     - Max(x.amplitude, y.amplitude)
   * - x - y
     - Subtraction
     - Min(x.resolution, y.resolution)
     - Max(x.amplitude, y.amplitude)
   * - x * y
     - Multiplication
     - x.resolution * y.resolution)
     - x.amplitude * y.amplitude
   * - x >> y
     - Arithmetic shift right, y : Int
     - x.amplitude >> y
     - x.resolution >> y
   * - x << y
     - Arithmetic shift left, y : Int
     - x.amplitude << y
     - x.resolution << y
   * - x >>| y
     - Arithmetic shift right, y : Int
     - x.amplitude >> y
     - x.resolution
   * - x <<| y
     - Arithmetic shift left, y : Int
     - x.amplitude << y
     - x.resolution

Comparison
~~~~~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Operator
     - Description
     - Return type
   * - x === y
     - Equality
     - Bool
   * - x =/= y
     - Inequality
     - Bool
   * - x > y
     - Greater than
     - Bool
   * - x >= y
     - Greater than or equal
     - Bool
   * - x > y
     - Less than
     - Bool
   * - x >= y
     - Less than or equal
     - Bool

Type cast
~~~~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 1 3 2

   * - Operator
     - Description
     - Return
   * - x.asBits
     - Binary cast to Bits
     - Bits(w(x) bits)
   * - x.asUInt
     - Binary cast to UInt
     - UInt(w(x) bits)
   * - x.asSInt
     - Binary cast to SInt
     - SInt(w(x) bits)
   * - x.asBools
     - Cast into a array of Bool
     - Vec(Bool,width(x))
   * - x.toUInt
     - Return the corresponding UInt (with truncation)
     - UInt
   * - x.toSInt
     - Return the corresponding SInt (with truncation)
     - SInt
   * - x.toUFix
     - Return the corresponding UFix
     - UFix
   * - x.toSFix
     - Return the corresponding SFix
     - SFix

Misc
~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 2 5 2

   * - Name
     - Return
     - Description
   * - x.maxValue
     - Return the maximum value storable
     - Double
   * - x.minValue
     - Return the minimum value storable
     - Double
   * - x.resolution
     - x.amplitude * y.amplitude
     - Double

Commit message:

Add details on the `exp` constructor on Fix page.

source/SpinalHDL/Data types/Fix.rst, after:

.. warning::
   SpinalHDL fixed-point support is only partially used/tested, if you find any bugs with it, or you think that some functionality is missing, please create a `Github issue <https://github.com/SpinalHDL/SpinalHDL/issues>`_. Also, please do not use undocumented features in your code.

.. _fixed:

UFix/SFix
=========

Description
^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``UFix`` and ``SFix`` types correspond to a vector of bits that can be used for fixed-point arithmetic.

Declaration
^^^^^^^^^^^

The syntax to declare a fixed-point number is as follows:

Unsigned Fixed-Point
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 3 1 2 3 1

   * - Syntax
     - bit width
     - resolution
     - max
     - min
   * - UFix(peak: ExpNumber, resolution: ExpNumber)
     - peak-resolution
     - 2^resolution
     - 2^peak-2^resolution
     - 0
   * - UFix(peak: ExpNumber, width: BitCount)
     - width
     - 2^(peak-width)
     - 2^peak-2^(peak-width)
     - 0

Signed Fixed-Point
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 3 1 2 3 1

   * - Syntax
     - bit width
     - resolution
     - max
     - min
   * - SFix(peak: ExpNumber, resolution: ExpNumber)
     - peak-resolution+1
     - 2^resolution
     - 2^peak-2^resolution
     - -(2^peak)
   * - SFix(peak: ExpNumber, width: BitCount)
     - width
     - 2^(peak-width-1)
     - 2^peak-2^(peak-width-1)
     - -(2^peak)

Format
~~~~~~

The chosen format follows the usual way of defining fixed-point number format using Q notation. More information can be found on the `Wikipedia page about the Q number format <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Q_(number_format)>`_.

For example Q8.2 will mean a fixed-point number of 8+2 bits, where 8 bits are used for the natural part and 2 bits for the fractional part.
If the fixed-point number is signed, one more bit is used for the sign.

The resolution is defined as being the smallest power of two that can be represented in this number.

.. note::
   To make representing power-of-two numbers less error prone, there is a numeric type in ``spinal.core`` called ``ExpNumber``, which is used for the fixed-point type constructors.
   A convenience wrapper exists for this type, in the form of the ``exp`` function (used in the code samples on this page).

Examples
~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: scala

   // Unsigned Fixed-Point
   val UQ_8_2 = UFix(peak = 8 exp, resolution = -2 exp) // bit width = 8 - (-2) = 10 bits
   val UQ_8_2 = UFix(8 exp, -2 exp)

   val UQ_8_2 = UFix(peak = 8 exp, width = 10 bits)
   val UQ_8_2 = UFix(8 exp, 10 bits)

   // Signed Fixed-Point
   val Q_8_2 = SFix(peak = 8 exp, resolution = -2 exp) // bit width = 8 - (-2) + 1 = 11 bits
   val Q_8_2 = SFix(8 exp, -2 exp)

   val Q_8_2 = SFix(peak = 8 exp, width = 11 bits)
   val Q_8_2 = SFix(8 exp, 11 bits)

Assignments
^^^^^^^^^^^

Valid Assignments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

An assignment to a fixed-point value is valid when there is no bit loss. Any bit loss will result in an error.

If the source fixed-point value is too big, the ``.truncated`` function will allow you to resize the source number to match the destination size.

Example
"""""""

.. code-block:: scala

   val i16_m2 = SFix(16 exp, -2 exp)
   val i16_0  = SFix(16 exp,  0 exp)
   val i8_m2  = SFix( 8 exp, -2 exp)
   val o16_m2 = SFix(16 exp, -2 exp)
   val o16_m0 = SFix(16 exp,  0 exp)
   val o14_m2 = SFix(14 exp, -2 exp)

   o16_m2 := i16_m2            // OK
   o16_m0 := i16_m2            // Not OK, Bit loss
   o14_m2 := i16_m2            // Not OK, Bit loss
   o16_m0 := i16_m2.truncated  // OK, as it is resized
   o14_m2 := i16_m2.truncated  // OK, as it is resized

From a Scala constant
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Scala ``BigInt`` or ``Double`` types can be used as constants when assigning to ``UFix`` or ``SFix`` signals.

Example
"""""""

.. code-block:: scala

   val i4_m2 = SFix(4 exp, -2 exp)
   i4_m2 := 1.25    // Will load 5 in i4_m2.raw
   i4_m2 := 4       // Will load 16 in i4_m2.raw

Raw value
^^^^^^^^^

The integer representation of the fixed-point number can be read or written by using the ``raw`` property.

Example
~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: scala

   val UQ_8_2 = UFix(8 exp, 10 bits)
   UQ_8_2.raw := 4        // Assign the value corresponding to 1.0
   UQ_8_2.raw := U(17)    // Assign the value corresponding to 4.25

Operators
^^^^^^^^^

The following operators are available for the ``UFix`` type:

Arithmetic
~~~~~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 1 7 4 7

   * - Operator
     - Description
     - Returned resolution
     - Returned amplitude
   * - x + y
     - Addition
     - Min(x.resolution, y.resolution)
     - Max(x.amplitude, y.amplitude)
   * - x - y
     - Subtraction
     - Min(x.resolution, y.resolution)
     - Max(x.amplitude, y.amplitude)
   * - x * y
     - Multiplication
     - x.resolution * y.resolution)
     - x.amplitude * y.amplitude
   * - x >> y
     - Arithmetic shift right, y : Int
     - x.amplitude >> y
     - x.resolution >> y
   * - x << y
     - Arithmetic shift left, y : Int
     - x.amplitude << y
     - x.resolution << y
   * - x >>| y
     - Arithmetic shift right, y : Int
     - x.amplitude >> y
     - x.resolution
   * - x <<| y
     - Arithmetic shift left, y : Int
     - x.amplitude << y
     - x.resolution

Comparison
~~~~~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Operator
     - Description
     - Return type
   * - x === y
     - Equality
     - Bool
   * - x =/= y
     - Inequality
     - Bool
   * - x > y
     - Greater than
     - Bool
   * - x >= y
     - Greater than or equal
     - Bool
   * - x > y
     - Less than
     - Bool
   * - x >= y
     - Less than or equal
     - Bool

Type cast
~~~~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 1 3 2

   * - Operator
     - Description
     - Return
   * - x.asBits
     - Binary cast to Bits
     - Bits(w(x) bits)
   * - x.asUInt
     - Binary cast to UInt
     - UInt(w(x) bits)
   * - x.asSInt
     - Binary cast to SInt
     - SInt(w(x) bits)
   * - x.asBools
     - Cast into a array of Bool
     - Vec(Bool,width(x))
   * - x.toUInt
     - Return the corresponding UInt (with truncation)
     - UInt
   * - x.toSInt
     - Return the corresponding SInt (with truncation)
     - SInt
   * - x.toUFix
     - Return the corresponding UFix
     - UFix
   * - x.toSFix
     - Return the corresponding SFix
     - SFix

Misc
~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 2 5 2

   * - Name
     - Return
     - Description
   * - x.maxValue
     - Return the maximum value storable
     - Double
   * - x.minValue
     - Return the minimum value storable
     - Double
   * - x.resolution
     - x.amplitude * y.amplitude
     - Double
