source/SpinalHDL/Introduction/SpinalHDL.rst, before:

.. _Introduction/SpinalHDL:

About SpinalHDL
---------------

What is SpinalHDL?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

SpinalHDL is an open source high-level hardware description language and a tool
written in `Scala <https://scala-lang.org/>`_, a statically-typed functional
language using the Java virtual machine (JVM). It can be used as an alternative
to VHDL or Verilog to describe synthesizable digital components.

Once code is written in *SpinalHDL*, the tool can:

* Generate VHDL, Verilog or SystemVerilog, to instantiate it in one
  of these languages or give it to any simulator or synthesis tool. It runs
  design checks during generation.
* Boot a simulation using Verilator or another supported simulator.

SpinalHDL makes it possible to efficiently describe hardware, giving names to
digital hardware notions; the most obvious examples are ``Reg`` and ``Latch``.
In event-driven languages such as VHDL and Verilog, to use these two common
elements, the user has to describe how to simulate them with a process, so that
the synthesis tool can infer what cell it is. With SpinalHDL, you just have to
declare a ``Reg`` or a ``Latch``.

SpinalHDL is not an HLS approach. Its goal is not to automagically transform an
abstract algorithm into a digital circuit. Its goad is to create a new
abstraction level by naming things, to help the designer reuse their code and
not write the same thing over and over again.

SpinalHDL is not an analog modeling language. VHDL and Verilog make it possible
for analog designers to provide a model of their IP to digital designers.
SpinalHDL does not address this case, and is for digital designers to describe
their own digital designs.

.. note::
   SpinalHDL is *fully interoperable* with standard VHDL/Verilog-based EDA tools (simulators and synthetizers) as the output generated by the toolchain could be VHDL or Verilog. 
   It also enables mixed designs where SpinalHDL components inter-operate with VHDL or Verilog IPs.


Advantages of using SpinalHDL over VHDL / Verilog
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As SpinalHDL is based on a high-level language, it provides several advantages to improve your hardware coding:

#. **No more endless wiring** - Create and connect complex buses like AXI in one single line.
#. **Evolving capabilities** - Create your own bus definitions and abstraction layers.
#. **Reduce code size** - By a high factor, especially for wiring. This enables you to have a better overview of your code base, increase your productivity and create fewer headaches.
#. **Free and user friendly IDE** - Thanks to Scala tools for auto-completion, error highlighting, navigation shortcuts, and many others.
#. **Powerful and easy type conversions** - Bidirectional translation between any data type and bits. Useful when loading a complex data structure from a CPU interface.
#. **Design checks** - Early stage lints to check that there are eg no combinatorial loops / latches.
#. **Clock domain safety** - Early stage lints to inform you that there are no unintentional clock domain crossings.
#. **Generic design** - There are no restrictions to the genericity of your hardware description by using Scala constructs.

Commit message:

Add spinal development flow
SpinalDevFlow.png extracted from presentation.pdf

source/SpinalHDL/Introduction/SpinalHDL.rst, after:

.. _Introduction/SpinalHDL:

About SpinalHDL
---------------

What is SpinalHDL?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

SpinalHDL is an open source high-level hardware description language and a tool
written in `Scala <https://scala-lang.org/>`_, a statically-typed functional
language using the Java virtual machine (JVM). It can be used as an alternative
to VHDL or Verilog to describe synthesizable digital components.

Once code is written in *SpinalHDL*, the tool can:

* Generate VHDL, Verilog or SystemVerilog, to instantiate it in one
  of these languages or give it to any simulator or synthesis tool. It runs
  design checks during generation.
* Boot a simulation using Verilator or another supported simulator.

SpinalHDL makes it possible to efficiently describe hardware, giving names to
digital hardware notions; the most obvious examples are ``Reg`` and ``Latch``.
In event-driven languages such as VHDL and Verilog, to use these two common
elements, the user has to describe how to simulate them with a process, so that
the synthesis tool can infer what cell it is. With SpinalHDL, you just have to
declare a ``Reg`` or a ``Latch``.

SpinalHDL is not an HLS approach. Its goal is not to automagically transform an
abstract algorithm into a digital circuit. Its goad is to create a new
abstraction level by naming things, to help the designer reuse their code and
not write the same thing over and over again.

SpinalHDL is not an analog modeling language. VHDL and Verilog make it possible
for analog designers to provide a model of their IP to digital designers.
SpinalHDL does not address this case, and is for digital designers to describe
their own digital designs.

.. note::
   SpinalHDL is *fully interoperable* with standard VHDL/Verilog-based EDA tools (simulators and synthetizers) as the output generated by the toolchain could be VHDL or Verilog. 
   It also enables mixed designs where SpinalHDL components inter-operate with VHDL or Verilog IPs.


The Spinal development flow
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When developing IPs or products, you write hardware descriptions using SpinalHDL
into ``.scala`` files, then you generate VHDL or Verilog files in order to
provide them to the simulation and synthesis tools.

.. image:: SpinalDevFlow.png
   :height: 16em
   :align: center

As SpinalHDL is interoperable with VHDL and (System)Verilog, you can both
instantiate SpinalHDL IPs in these language (using generated code) and
instantiate IPs in these languages in SpinalHDL (using ``BlackBox``).

To debug your SpinalHDL IPs, tools are provided to let you write your tests in
``.scala`` files and directly run simulation, so that you do not have to
generate files and interact with the simulator yourself.


Advantages of using SpinalHDL over VHDL / Verilog
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As SpinalHDL is based on a high-level language, it provides several advantages to improve your hardware coding:

#. **No more endless wiring** - Create and connect complex buses like AXI in one single line.
#. **Evolving capabilities** - Create your own bus definitions and abstraction layers.
#. **Reduce code size** - By a high factor, especially for wiring. This enables you to have a better overview of your code base, increase your productivity and create fewer headaches.
#. **Free and user friendly IDE** - Thanks to Scala tools for auto-completion, error highlighting, navigation shortcuts, and many others.
#. **Powerful and easy type conversions** - Bidirectional translation between any data type and bits. Useful when loading a complex data structure from a CPU interface.
#. **Design checks** - Early stage lints to check that there are eg no combinatorial loops / latches.
#. **Clock domain safety** - Early stage lints to inform you that there are no unintentional clock domain crossings.
#. **Generic design** - There are no restrictions to the genericity of your hardware description by using Scala constructs.
