source/SpinalHDL/Semantic/assignments.rst, before:

.. role:: raw-html-m2r(raw)
   :format: html

Assignments
===========

Assignments
-----------

There are multiple assignment operators:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 1 5

   * - Symbol
     - Description
   * - ``:=``
     - Standard assignment, equivalent to ``<=`` in VHDL/Verilog. The last assignment to a variable wins; the value is not updated until the next simulation delta cycle.
   * - ``\=``
     - Equivalent to ``:=`` in VHDL and ``=`` in Verilog. The value is updated instantly in-place.
   * - ``<>``
     - Automatic connection between 2 signals or two bundles of the same type. Direction is inferred by using signal direction (in/out). (Similar behavior to ``:=``\ )


.. code-block:: scala

   // Because of hardware concurrency, `a` is always read as '1' by b and c
   val a, b, c = UInt(4 bits)
   a := 0
   b := a
   a := 1  // a := 1 "wins"
   c := a  

   var x = UInt(4 bits)
   val y, z = UInt(4 bits)
   x := 0
   y := x      // y read x with the value 0
   x \= x + 1
   z := x      // z read x with the value 1

   // Automatic connection between two UART interfaces.
   uartCtrl.io.uart <> io.uart

It also support Bundle assignment, Bundle multiple signals together use ``()`` to assign and assign to

.. code-block:: scala

   val a, b, c = UInt(4 bits)
   val d       = UInt(12 bits)
   val e       = Bits(10 bits)
   val f       = SInt(2  bits)
   val g       = Bits()

   (a, b, c) := B(0, 12 bits)
   (a, b, c) := d.asBits
   (a, b, c) := (e, f).asBits
   g         := (a, b, c, e, f).asBits

It is important to understand that in SpinalHDL, the nature of a signal (combinational/sequential) is defined in its declaration, not by the way it is assigned.
All datatype instances will define a combinational signal, while a datatype instance wrapped with ``Reg(...)`` will define a sequential (registered) signal.

.. code-block:: scala

   val a = UInt(4 bits) // Define a combinational signal
   val b = Reg(UInt(4 bits)) // Define a registered signal
   val c = Reg(UInt(4 bits)) init(0) // Define a registered signal which is set to 0 when a reset occurs

Width checking
--------------

SpinalHDL checks that the bit count of the left side and the right side of an assignment matches. There are multiple ways to adapt the width of a given BitVector (``Bits``, ``UInt``, ``SInt``):

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 2 5

   * - Resizing techniques
     - Description
   * - x := y.resized
     - Assign x with a resized copy of y, resize value is automatically inferred to match x
   * - x := y.resize(newWidth)
     - Assign x with a resized copy of y, size is manually calculated


There is one case where Spinal automatically resizes a value:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 7 10 10

   * - Assignment
     - Problem
     - SpinalHDL action
   * - myUIntOf_8bit := U(3)
     - U(3) creates an UInt of 2 bits, which doesn't match the left side (8 bits)
     - Because U(3) is a "weak" bit count inferred signal, SpinalHDL resizes it automatically


Combinatorial loops
-------------------

SpinalHDL checks that there are no combinatorial loops (latches) in your design.
If one is detected, it raises an error and SpinalHDL will print the path of the loop.

Commit message:

fix: assignment overlap in Semantic/assignments

source/SpinalHDL/Semantic/assignments.rst, after:

.. role:: raw-html-m2r(raw)
   :format: html

Assignments
===========

Assignments
-----------

There are multiple assignment operators:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 1 5

   * - Symbol
     - Description
   * - ``:=``
     - Standard assignment, equivalent to ``<=`` in VHDL/Verilog.
   * - ``\=``
     - Equivalent to ``:=`` in VHDL and ``=`` in Verilog. The value is updated instantly in-place.
   * - ``<>``
     - Automatic connection between 2 signals or two bundles of the same type. Direction is inferred by using signal direction (in/out). (Similar behavior to ``:=``\ )

When muxing (for instance using ``when``, see :doc:`when_switch`.), the last
valid standard assignment wins. Else, assigning twice to the same assignee
results in an assignment overlap (see :doc:`../Design errors/assignment_overlap`).

.. code-block:: scala

   val a, b, c = UInt(4 bits)
   a := 0
   b := a
   //a := 1 // assignment overlap with a := 0
   c := a

   var x = UInt(4 bits)
   val y, z = UInt(4 bits)
   x := 0
   y := x      // y read x with the value 0
   x \= x + 1
   z := x      // z read x with the value 1

   // Automatic connection between two UART interfaces.
   uartCtrl.io.uart <> io.uart

It also supports Bundle assignment. Bundle multiple signals together using
``()`` to assign and assign to

.. code-block:: scala

   val a, b, c = UInt(4 bits)
   val d       = UInt(12 bits)
   val e       = Bits(10 bits)
   val f       = SInt(2  bits)
   val g       = Bits()

   (a, b, c) := B(0, 12 bits)
   (a, b, c) := d.asBits
   (a, b, c) := (e, f).asBits
   g         := (a, b, c, e, f).asBits

It is important to understand that in SpinalHDL, the nature of a signal (combinational/sequential) is defined in its declaration, not by the way it is assigned.
All datatype instances will define a combinational signal, while a datatype instance wrapped with ``Reg(...)`` will define a sequential (registered) signal.

.. code-block:: scala

   val a = UInt(4 bits) // Define a combinational signal
   val b = Reg(UInt(4 bits)) // Define a registered signal
   val c = Reg(UInt(4 bits)) init(0) // Define a registered signal which is set to 0 when a reset occurs

Width checking
--------------

SpinalHDL checks that the bit count of the left side and the right side of an assignment matches. There are multiple ways to adapt the width of a given BitVector (``Bits``, ``UInt``, ``SInt``):

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 2 5

   * - Resizing techniques
     - Description
   * - x := y.resized
     - Assign x with a resized copy of y, resize value is automatically inferred to match x
   * - x := y.resize(newWidth)
     - Assign x with a resized copy of y, size is manually calculated


There is one case where Spinal automatically resizes a value:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 7 10 10

   * - Assignment
     - Problem
     - SpinalHDL action
   * - myUIntOf_8bit := U(3)
     - U(3) creates an UInt of 2 bits, which doesn't match the left side (8 bits)
     - Because U(3) is a "weak" bit count inferred signal, SpinalHDL resizes it automatically


Combinatorial loops
-------------------

SpinalHDL checks that there are no combinatorial loops (latches) in your design.
If one is detected, it raises an error and SpinalHDL will print the path of the loop.
